# Ports & Protocols

# Transport Layer Reliability

Before this activity, it is important to understand:

- IP (Layer 3) is responsible for delivering packets between devices.
- TCP and UDP (Layer 4) determine how data is handled once it is being delivered.
- Specifcially, TCP guarantees transmission, while UDP does not and is designed for speed.
- ICMP (Layer 3) determines if the desired device was reachable and is used for error reporting.

**Building and Verifying the Network**

First, a network topology was created with two PCs and a switch, with the PCs being on the same subnet:

INSERT TOPOLOGY

To ensure connectivity, PC1 pings PC2:

INSERT PING

All packets were successfully transmitted, so the connection was successful.

**Observing TCP Behavior**

In simulation mode, TCP traffic was generated by visiting PC2 from PC1's web broswer:

INSERT WEB BROWSER

Then, packets were filtered to only show TCP, and the data transmission was simulated.


### Applying Application and Remote Access Protocols Across the Stack

In this activity, multiple protocols were analyzed across different layers.

**Full Stack Analysis: HTTP vs. HTTPS**

The command `curl -I http://example.com` was run to communicate with an HTTP server:

INSERT CURL HTTP

`ss -tn` was used next to check active connections at the time of the curl request:

INSERT SS TN HTTP

Below is the relevant information from the curl request:

- Destination Port: 104.18.27.120:80 (from `ss -tn`)
- Connection State: ESTAB/Established (from `ss -tn`)
- Transport Protocol: HTTP

The destination port matches what is expected, since HTTP generally runs on port 80.

Next, `curl -I https://example.com` was run to communicate using HTTPS:

INSERT CURL HTTPS

`ss -tn` was used again for this URL:

INSERT SS TN HTTPS

When switching to HTTPS, the application layer changes by TLS, ensuring security. This will cause packet data to be encrypted on the application layer. On the transport layer, the destination port changed to 443, as shown by the output of `ss -tn` displaying **172.66.47.170:443**. This acts as an additional destination before port 80. In HTTP, the port number 80 is involved, while in HTTPS, the port number 443 is involved. Between HTTP and TCP, TLS (Transport Layer Security) appears, ensuring secure communication. TLS does not replace TCP, but rather operates above it, since TCP is still required to facilitate data transmission.

**DNS as a Supporting Application Protocol**

To analyze DNS, `nslookup example.com` was run:

INSERT NSLOOKUP

As shown above, the sever and address fields suggest that DNS typically uses port 53. Since DNS is designed to allow efficient access to an IP address via a string, DNS generally uses UDP for efficiency, rather than TCP. DNS does not guarantee delivery in most cases because of its use of UDP. While TCP would ensure delivery, UDP is primarily focused on speed of transmission. DNS might switch to TCP if it is very important that the desired IP address can always be accessed, such as in large businesses.

**Remote Access Using SSH**

Using `ip addr`, the IPv4 address of the host is 10.12.26.25.

Next, `ssh ubuntu@localhost` was used to connect back to the same host device using loopback:

INSERT SSH

Immediately after, `ss -tn` was run to capture active connections:

INSERT SS TN SSH

As shown above, port **22** is used by SSH. Using a table, port 22 was found to be a TCP port, so SSH usually acts under TCP. This connection is encrypted because SSH always encrypts the session, regardless of the destination. Although this is a loopback connection, the presence on port 22 and the function of SSH confirm that this connection is encrypted. All OSI layers except for layer 1 (physical) are involved in this SSH request because the user facilitates the request at the application level, and it works down to transmission via MAC addresses. However, since the device is communicating with itself, there is no physical transmission necessary.

**Secure File Transfer**

INSERT

### Investigating HTTP Status Codes and Redirect Behavior

**Observing an HTTP Redirect**

A redirect was analyzed by using *https://slides.google.com*, which should redirect to *https://docs.google.com/presentation*. To view the HTTP response headers, `curl -I https://slides.google.com` was run:

INSERT OUTPUT AND CIRCLE STATUS CODE/LOCATION

As highlighted above, the HTTP status code 301 was returned. This code signifies that the requested URL has been permanently moved to the URL listed under the *location* field. The Application Layer (Layer 7) of the OSI model is responsible for interpreting this message, since it determines how the application running the curl command should handle the result of the request.

**Investigating the Redirect Target**

Since the listed URL in *location* was *https://docs.google.com/presentation*, the curl command was next used with this URL:

INSERT OUTPUT AND CIRCLE STUFF

At this time, the HTTP status code 302 was returned. A status code of 301 signifies a permanent redirect to a new URL while a status code of 302 signifies a temporary redirect to another URL. A server may temporarily redirect a request if the request cannot be processed fast enough or if there is maintenance in the server. A web browser would respond to a 301 code by automatically redirecting to the *location* field and notifying the user that the URL they attempted to use is deprecated. Meanwhile, a browser would respond to a 302 code by automatically redirecting the user but telling the user to continue using the requested URL.

**Observing Transport Behavior**

`ss -tn` was then used to display the active TCP connections directly after a redirect:

INSERT SS TN

The ESTAB connections confirm that there is still a TCP connection to the remote server when redirecting. Thus, it is confirmed that the Transmission Control Protcol (TCP) carried out the HTTP request. Redirects are handled by HTTP because they only function at the Application layer, while TCP facilitates the actual transfer of redirect requests. TCP only ensures transport reliability and does not act on the Application layer. During this transaction, TLS encryption encrypts both the HTTP request and response during a redirect, ensuring that the request data is secured.

**Reasoning About Server Behavior**

A server does not simply send the new page content automatically because the application first needs to receive the new location URL in place of the incorrect URL used in the request. This is received via HTTP request redirect messages. The server instructs the client to make a new request since the server requires a request from the client to actually display a page's content. This provides the advantage of performing maintenance on a website's main URL while still keeping the website functional through the redirected URL. This can also help if a particular server is down, providing an alternate server to access the same service.